Key Point 
- An objedct's data and methods can be accessed through the dot ```.``` operator via the object's reference variable

Newly created objects are allocated in the memory. They can be accessed via reference variables

Objects are accessed via the object's reference variables, which contains references to the objects. Such Vaiables are declared using the following syntax:
```
ClassName objectRefVar;
```
A class is essentially a programmer defined type. A class is a _reference_ type, which means that variable of the class type can reference an instance of the class

The following statement declares the variable ```myCircle``` to be of ```Circle``` Type:
```
Circle myCircle;
```
the variable ```myCircle``` can reference a ```Circle``` object. The next statement creates an object and assigns its reference to ```myCircle```
```
myCircle = new circle();
```
You can write a single statement that combines the declaration of an object reference variable, the creation of an object, and assigning of an object reference to the variable with the following syntax:
```
ClassName objectRefVar = new ClassName();
```
EXAMPLE:
```
Circle myCircle = new Circle();
```
The variable ```myCircle``` holds a reference to a ```Circle``` object

-----------------------------------------------
# Object vs Object Reference Variable**

**Note:**

An object reference variable that appears to hold an object actually contains a reference to that object. 

Strictly Speaking,
- An object reference variable and an object are **DIFFERENT**
  - but
    - most of the time the distinction can be ignored
    - Therefore
      - it is fine, for simplicity, to say that ```myCircle``` is a ```Circle``` object rather than use the long-winded description that ```myCircle``` is a ```Circle``` object rather than use the long-winded description that ```myCircle``` is a variable that contains a reference to a ```Circle``` object.
     
------------------------------
# Array Object 
**NOTE:**

Arrays are treated as objects in Java. Arrays are created using the new operator. An Array Variable is Actually a Variable that contains a reference to an array.

---------------------------------------
# 9.5.1 - Accessing aan Object's Data and Methods

 In OOP Technology an object's member refers to its data fields and methods

 After an oject is created
 - Its data can be accessed and its methods can be invoked using the _dot_ operator (.),
   - AKA the _object member access operator_

  ```objectRefVar.dataField``` references a data field in the object.
  
  ```objectRefVar.method(arguments)``` invokes a method on the object.

  EXAMPLE
  ```myCircle.Radius``` references the radius in ```myCircle``` and ```myCircle.getArea()``` invokes the ```getArea``` method on ```myCircle```. Methods are invoked as operations on objects

**Calling Object**

The data field ```radius``` is referred to as an ```instance``` variable because it is dependent on a specific instance. For the same reason, the method ```getArea``` is reffered to as an instance method becuase you can invoke it only on a specific instance. The object on which an instance method is invoked is called a ```calling``` object. 

----------------------
# Caution - Invoing Methods  
Recall that you use ```Math.methodName(arguments)``` to invoke a method in the ```Math``` class.
```
Example
Math.pow(3,2.5)
```
Can you invoke ```getArea()``` using ```Circle.getArea()```?
- NO!!!!!!

**ALL THE METHODS IN THE ```Maths``` CLASS ARE STATIC METHODS**. Which are defined by using the ```static``` keyword. However, ```getArea()``` is an instance method, thus, nonstatic.

**IT MUST BE INVOKED FROM AN OBJECT USING:**
```
objectRefVar.methodName(arguments)
```
Example:
```
myCircle.getArea();
```
More Explaination on 9.7, Ststic Variables, Constants, and Methods. 

Shortcut to 9.7 → 

-------------------------
**NOTE:**

Usually you create an object and assign it to a variable, then Later you can use the variable to reference the object

Occasionally, an object does not need to be reference later.

in this case
- you can create an object without explicitly it to a variable using the syntax:
```
new Circle();
```
or
```
System.out.println("Area is " + new Circle(5).getArea());
```
The former statement creates a ```Circle``` object. The latter creates a ```Circle``` object and invokes its ```getArea``` method to return its area. An object created in this way is known as an _anonymous_ object.

---------------------------------
# 9.5.2 -   Reference Data Fields and the ```null``` Value
# reference data fields
The data fields can be of reference types.

EXAMPLE
- the following ```Student``` class contains a data field ```name``` of the ```String``` type.
- ```String``` is a predefined Java class
```
class Student {
  String name;                  // name has the default value null
  int age:                      // age has the default value 0
  boolean isScienceMajor;       // isScienceMajor has default value false
  char gender;                  // gender has default value '\u000'
```
If a data field of a reference type does not reference any object, the data field holds a special Java Value
- ```null```   

-------------------------
# Previous Lesson - 9.4

https://github.com/aalons012/Java-notes/blob/main/COP_2800_and_2805C/COP2805C/E-Book/Chapter%209%20-%20Objects%20and%20Classes/9.4%20-%20Constructing%20Objects%20Using%20Constructors.md

----------------------
# Next Lesson - 9.6


-------------------
