**CONCEPT**:
- A variable is a named storage location in the computer’s memory. A literal is a value that is written into the code of a program.

Video: [2.3 - Declaring Variables.zip](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/16382974/2.3.-.Declaring.Variables.zip)

As you discovered in Chapter 1, variables allow you to store and work with data in the computer’s memory. Part of the job of programming is to determine how many variables a program will need and what types of data they will hold. The program in Code Listing 2-7 is an example of a Java program with a variable.

```
Code Listing 2-7 (Variable.java)
// This program has a variable. 
 
public class Variable 
{ 
   public static void main(String[] args) 
   { 
      int value; 
     
      value = 5; 
      System.out.print("The value is "); 
      System.out.println(value); 
   } 
}
 
===============
Program Output
===============

The value is 5
```
Let’s look more closely at this program. Here is line 7:
```
int value;
```
This is called a variable declaration. Variables must be declared before they can be used. A variable declaration tells the compiler the variable’s name and the type of data it will hold. This line indicates the variable’s name is value. The word int stands for integer, so value will only be used to hold integer numbers. Notice that variable declarations end with a semicolon. The next statement in this program appears in line 9:
```
value = 5;
```
This is called an assignment statement. The equal sign is an operator that stores the value on its right (in this case 5) into the variable named on its left. After this line executes, the value variable will contain the value 5.

**NOTE**: This line does not print anything on the computer screen. It runs silently behind the scenes.

Now look at lines 10 and 11:
```
System.out.print("The value is "); 
System.out.println(value);
```
The statement in line 10 sends the string literal “The value is ” to the print method. The statement in line 11 sends the name of the value variable to the println method. When you send a variable name to print or println, the variable’s contents are displayed. Notice there are no quotation marks around value. Look at what happens in Code Listing 2-8.
```
Code Listing 2-8 (Variable2.java)
// This program has a variable. 
     
public class Variable2 
{ 
   public static void main(String[] args) 
   { 
      int value; 
     
      value = 5; 
      System.out.print("The value is "); 
      System.out.println("value"); 
   } 
}
==============
Program Output
================
The value is value
```
When double quotation marks are placed around the word value it becomes a string literal, not a variable name. When string literals are sent to print or println, they are displayed exactly as they appear inside the quotation marks.

# Displaying Multiple Items with the + Operator
When the + operator is used with strings, it is known as the string concatenation operator. To concatenate means to append, so the string concatenation operator appends one string to another. For example, look at the following statement:
```
System.out.println("This is " + "one string.");
``` 
This statement will print:
```
This is one string.
``` 
The + operator produces a string that is the combination of the two strings used as its operands. You can also use the + operator to concatenate the contents of a variable to a string. The following code shows an example:
```
number = 5; 
System.out.println("The value is " + number);
```
The second line uses the + operator to concatenate the contents of the number variable with the string “The value is ”. Although number is not a string, the + operator converts its value to a string and then concatenates that value with the first string. The output that will be displayed is:
```
The value is 5
```
Sometimes the argument you use with print or println is too long to fit on one line in your program code. However, a string literal cannot begin on one line and end on another. For example, the following will cause an error:
```
// This is an error! 
System.out.println("Enter a value that is greater than zero 
                   and less than 10." );
```
You can remedy this problem by breaking the argument up into smaller string literals, and then using the string concatenation operator to spread them out over more than one line. Here is an example:
```
System.out.println("Enter a value that is " + 
                   "greater than zero and less " + 
                   "than 10." );
```
In this statement, the argument is broken up into three strings and joined using the + operator. The following example shows the same technique used when the contents of a variable are part of the concatenation:
```
sum = 249; 
System.out.println("The sum of the three " + 
                   "numbers is " + sum);
```

# Be Careful with Quotation Marks
As shown in Code Listing 2-8, placing quotation marks around a variable name changes the program’s results. In fact, placing double quotation marks around anything that is not intended to be a string literal will create an error of some type. For example, in Code Listings 2-7 and 2-8, the number 5 was assigned to the variable value. It would have been an error to perform the assignment this way:
```
value = "5"; // Error!
```
In this statement, 5 is no longer an integer, but a string literal. Because value was declared as an integer variable, you can only store integers in it. In other words, 5 and “5” are not the same thing.

The fact that numbers can be represented as strings frequently confuses students who are new to programming. Just remember that strings are intended for humans to read. They are to be printed on computer screens or paper. Numbers, however, are intended primarily for mathematical operations. You cannot perform math on strings, and before numbers can be displayed on the screen, first they must be converted to strings. (Fortunately, print and println handle the conversion automatically when you send numbers to them.) Don’t fret if this still bothers you. Later in this chapter, we will shed more light on the differences among numbers, characters, and strings by discussing their internal storage.

# More about Literals
A literal is a value that is written in the code of a program. Literals are commonly assigned to variables or displayed. Code Listing 2-9 contains both literals and a variable.
```
Code Listing 2-9 (Literals.java)
// This program has literals and a variable. 
     
public class Literals 
{ 
   public static void main(String[] args) 
   { 
      int apples; 
     
      apples = 20; 
      System.out.println("Today we sold " + apples + 
                         " bushels of apples."); 
   } 
}

==============
Program Output
=============

Today we sold 20 bushels of apples.
```
Of course, the variable in this program is apples. It is declared as an integer. Table 2-3 shows a list of the literals found in the program.
```
Table 2-3
Literals
-----------------------------------------
      Literal	        Type of Literal
-----------------------------------------

        20	          Integer literal
  “Today we sold”	     String literal
“bushels of apples.”	 String literal

-----------------------------------------
```

# Identifiers
An identifier is a programmer-defined name that represents some element of a program. Variable names and class names are examples of identifiers. You may choose your own variable names and class names in Java, as long as you do not use any of the Java keywords. The keywords make up the core of the language and each has a specific purpose. Table 1-3 in Chapter 1 and Appendix C (available on the book’s companion Web site) show a complete list of Java keywords.

You should always choose names for your variables that give an indication of what they are used for. You may be tempted to declare variables with names like this:
```
int x;
```
The rather nondescript name, x, gives no clue as to what the variable’s purpose is. Here is a better example.
```
   int itemsOrdered;
```
The name itemsOrdered gives anyone reading the program an idea of what the variable is used for. This method of coding helps produce self-documenting programs, which means you get an understanding of what the program is doing just by reading its code. Because real-world programs usually have thousands of lines of code, it is important that they be as self-documenting as possible.

You have probably noticed the mixture of uppercase and lowercase letters in the name itemsOrdered. Although all of Java’s keywords must be written in lowercase, you may use uppercase letters in variable names. The reason the O in itemsOrdered is capitalized is to improve readability. Normally “items ordered” is used as two words. Variable names cannot contain spaces, however, so the two words must be combined. When “items” and “ordered” are stuck together, you get a variable declaration like this:
```
int itemsordered;
```
Capitalization of the letter O makes itemsOrdered easier to read. Typically, variable names begin with a lowercase letter, and after that, the first letter of each individual word that makes up the variable name is capitalized.

The following are some specific rules that must be followed with all identifiers:

- The first character must be one of the letters a–z or A–Z, an underscore (_), or a dollar sign ($).
- After the first character, you may use the letters a–z or A–Z, the digits 0–9, underscores (_), or dollar signs ($).
- Uppercase and lowercase characters are distinct. This means itemsOrdered is not the same as itemsordered.
- Identifiers cannot include spaces.

**NOTE**: Although the $ is a legal identifier character, it is normally used for special purposes. So, don’t use it in your variable names.

Table 2-4 shows a list of variable names and tells whether each is legal or illegal in Java.
```
Table 2-4
Some variable names
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Variable Name       Legal or Illegal?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

dayOfWeek           Legal

3dGraph             Illegal because identifiers cannot begin with a digit

june1997            Legal

mixture#3           Illegal because identifiers may use only alphabetic letters, digits, underscores, or dollar signs

week day            Illegal because identifiers cannot contain spaces

----------------------------------------------------------------------
```
**Class Names**
As mentioned before, it is standard practice to begin variable names with a lowercase letter, and then capitalize the first letter of each subsequent word that makes up the name. It is also a standard practice to capitalize the first letter of a class name, as well as the first letter of each subsequent word it contains. This helps differentiate the names of variables from the names of classes. For example, payRate would be a variable name, and Employee would be a class name.
