**Concept**:
- There are many different types of data. Variables are classified according to their data type, which determines the kind of data that may be stored in them.

Computer programs collect pieces of data from the real world and manipulate them in various ways. There are many different types of data. In the realm of numeric data, for example, there are whole and fractional numbers, negative and positive numbers, and numbers so large and others so small that they don’t even have a name. Then there is textual information. Names and addresses, for instance, are stored as strings of characters. When you write a program you must determine what types of data it is likely to encounter.

Each variable has a data type, which is the type of data that the variable can hold. Selecting the proper data type is important because a variable’s data type determines the amount of memory the variable uses, and the way the variable formats and stores data. It is important to select a data type that is appropriate for the type of data that your program will work with. If you are writing a program to calculate the number of miles to a distant star, you need variables that can hold very large numbers. If you are designing software to record microscopic dimensions, you need variables that store very small and precise numbers. If you are writing a program that must perform thousands of intensive calculations, you want variables that can be processed quickly. The data type of a variable determines all of these factors.

Table 2-5 shows all of the Java primitive data types for holding numeric data.
```
Table 2-5
Primitive data types for numeric data
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Data Type      Size           Range
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

byte           1 byte         Integers in the range of  −128 to  +127
 
short          2 bytes        Integers in the range of  −32,76 to  +32,767
 
int            4 bytes        Integers in the range of  −2,147,483,648 to  +2,147,483,647
 
long           8 bytes        Integers in the range of  −9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to  +9,223,372,036,854,775,807
 
float          4 bytes        Floating-point numbers in the range of  ±3.4×10^−38 to  ±3.4×10^38 with 7 digits of accuracy

double        8 bytes         Floating-point numbers in the range of  ±1.7×10Z^−308 to  ±1.7×10^308 with 15 digits of accuracy

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```
The words listed in the left column of Table 2-5 are the keywords that you use in variable declarations. A variable declaration takes the following general format:
```
DataType VariableName;
```
DataType is the name of the data type and VariableName is the name of the variable. Here are some examples of variable declarations:
```
byte inches;  
int speed;  
short month;  
float salesCommission;  
double distance;
```
The size column in Table 2-5 shows the number of bytes that a variable of each of the data types uses. For example, an int variable uses 4 bytes, and a double variable uses 8 bytes. The range column shows the ranges of numbers that may be stored in variables of each data type. For example, an int variable can hold numbers from  −2,147,483,648 up to  +2,147,483,647. One of the appealing characteristics of the Java language is that the sizes and ranges of all the primitive data types are the same on all computers.

**NOTE**: These data types are called “primitive” because you cannot use them to create objects. Recall from Chapter 1’s discussion on object-oriented programming that an object has attributes and methods. With the primitive data types, you can only create variables, and a variable can only be used to hold a single value. Such variables do not have attributes or methods.

# The integer Data Types
The first four data types listed in Table 2-5, byte, int, short, and long, are all integer data types. An integer variable can hold whole numbers such as 7, 125,  −14,
  and 6928. The program in Code Listing 2-10 shows several variables of different integer data types being used.
```
Code Listing 2-10 (IntegerVariables.java)
// This program has variables of several of the integer types. 
    
public class IntegerVariables 
{ 
   public static void main(String[] args) 
   { 
      int checking;    // Declare an int variable named checking. 
      byte miles;      // Declare a byte variable named miles. 
      short minutes;   // Declare a short variable named minutes. 
      long days;       // Declare a long variable named days. 
    
      checking = −20; 
      miles = 105; 
      minutes = 120; 
      days = 189000; 
      System.out.println("We have made a journey of " + miles + 
                         " miles."); 
      System.out.println("It took us " + minutes + " minutes."); 
      System.out.println("Our account balance is $" + checking); 
      System.out.println("About " + days + " days ago Columbus " + 
                         "stood on this spot."); 
   } 
}

================
Program Output
================

We have made a journey of 105 miles.
It took us 120 minutes.
Our account balance is $−20
About 189000 days ago Columbus stood on this spot.
```
In most programs you will need more than one variable of any given data type. If a program uses three integers, length, width, and area, they could be declared separately, as follows:
```
int length;  
int width;  
int area;
```
It is easier, however, to combine the three variable declarations:
```
int length, width, area;
```
You can declare several variables of the same type, simply by separating their names with commas.

**Integer Literals**
When you write an integer literal in your program code, Java assumes it to be of the int data type. For example, in Code Listing 2-10, the literals  −20, 105, 120, and 189000 are all treated as int values. You can force an integer literal to be treated as a long, however, by suffixing it with the letter L. For example, the value 57L would be treated as a long. Although you can use either an uppercase or a lowercase L, it is advisable to use the uppercase L because the lowercase l looks too much like the number 1.

**WARNING**! You cannot embed commas in numeric literals. For example, the following statement will cause an error:
```
number = 1,257,649;    // ERROR!
```
This statement must be written as:
```
number = 1257649;     // Correct.
```

**Floating-Point Data Types**
Whole numbers are not adequate for many jobs. If you are writing a program that works with dollar amounts or precise measurements, you need a data type that allows fractional values. In programming terms, these are called floating-point numbers. Values such as 1.7 and  −45.316
  are floating-point numbers.

In Java there are two data types that can represent floating-point numbers. They are float and double. The float data type is considered a single precision data type. It can store a floating-point number with 7 digits of accuracy. The double data type is considered a double precision data type. It can store a floating-point number with 15 digits of accuracy. The double data type uses twice as much memory as the float data type, however. A float variable occupies 4 bytes of memory, whereas a double variable uses 8 bytes.

Code Listing 2-11 shows a program that uses three double variables.
```
Code Listing 2-11 (Sale.java)
// This program demonstrates the double data type. 
    
public class Sale 
{ 
   public static void main(String[] args) 
   { 
      double price, tax, total; 
     
      price = 29.75; 
      tax = 1.76; 
      total = 31.51; 
      System.out.println("The price of the item " + 
                         "is " + price); 
      System.out.println("The tax is " + tax); 
      System.out.println("The total is " + total); 
   } 
}

================
Program Output
================

The price of the item is 29.75
The tax is 1.76
The total is 31.51
```
**Floating-Point Literals**
When you write a floating-point literal in your program code, Java assumes it to be of the double data type. For example, in Code Listing 2-11, the literals 29.75, 1.76, and 31.51 are all treated as double values. Because of this, a problem can arise when assigning a floating-point literal to a float variable. Java is a strongly typed language, which means that it only allows you to store values of compatible data types in variables. A double value is not compatible with a float variable because a double can be much larger or much smaller than the allowable range for a float. As a result, code such as the following will cause an error:
```
float number;  
number = 23.5;       // Error!
```
You can force a double literal to be treated as a float, however, by suffixing it with the letter F or f. The preceding code can be rewritten in the following manner to prevent an error:

float number;  
number = 23.5F;       // This will work.  
WARNING! If you are working with literals that represent dollar amounts, remember that you cannot embed currency symbols (such as $) or commas in the literal. For example, the following statement will cause an error:

grossPay = $1,257.00;       // ERROR! 
This statement must be written as:

grossPay = 1257.00;        // Correct. 
Scientific and E Notation
Floating-point literals can be represented in scientific notation. Take the number 47,281.97. In scientific notation this number is  4.728197×104.
  (  104
  is equal to 10,000, and  4.728197×10,000
  is 47,281.97.)

Java uses E notation to represent values in scientific notation. In E notation, the number  4.728197×104
  would be 4.728197E4. Table 2-6 shows other numbers represented in scientific and E notation.

Table 2-6 Floating-point representations
Decimal Notation	Scientific Notation	E Notation
247.91	
2.4791×102
 
2.4791E2
0.00072	
7.2×10−4
 
7.2E–4
2,900,000	
2.9×106
 
2.9E6
NOTE: The E can be uppercase or lowercase.

Code Listing 2-12 demonstrates the use of floating-point literals expressed in E notation.
```
Code Listing 2-12 (SunFacts.java)
// This program uses E notation. 
    
public class SunFacts 
{ 
   public static void main(String[] args) 
   { 
      double distance, mass; 
    
      distance = 1.495979E11; 
      mass = 1.989E30; 
      System.out.println("The sun is " + distance + 
                         " meters away."); 
      System.out.println("The sun's mass is " + mass + 
                         " kilograms."); 
   } 
} 
Program Output
The sun is 1.495979E11 meters away.
The sun's mass is 1.989E30 kilograms.
```
