**Key Point**
- Writing a program involves designing a strategy for solving the problem then using a programming language to implement that strategy.

Problem

--------
Let’s first consider the simple problem of computing the area of a circle. How do we write a program for solving this problem?

Writing a program involves designing algorithms and translating algorithms into programming instructions, or code. An algorithm lists the steps you can follow to solve a problem. Algorithms can help the programmer plan a program before writing it in a programming ­language. Algorithms can be described in natural languages or in pseudocode (natural language mixed with some programming code). The algorithm for calculating the area of a circle can be described as follows:
```
1. read in the circle's radius
2. Compute the Area using the Following area

        area = radius x radius x PI

3. Display the result
```
# Tip:
It’s always a good practice to outline your program (or its underlying problem) in the form of an algorithm before you begin coding.

When you code—that is, when you write a program—you translate an algorithm into a program. You already know every Java program begins with a class definition in which the keyword ```class``` is followed by the class name. 

Assume you have chosen ```ComputeArea``` as its class name

The outlook of the program would look as follows
```
public class ComputeArea {

// Details to be given later
}
```
As you may know, Every Java must have a ```main``` method.
- where program execution begins

The program is then expanded as follows
```
public class ComputeArea {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // READ IN RADIUS
    // COMPUTE AREA
    // DISPLAY THE AREA
  }
}
```
The program needs to read the radius entered by the user from the keyboard. This raises two important issues:
- Reading the radius
- Storing the radius in the program

Let’s address the second issue first. In order to store the radius, 
- the program needs to declare a symbol
  - called a variable.
    - A variable represents a value stored in the computer’s memory.

--------------------------------------------------------------------
# **Descriptive Names**

Rather than having ```x``` and ```y``` as variable names, choose descriptive names:

In this case, ```radius``` for radius and ```area``` for area. To let the compiler know what ```radius``` and ```area``` are, specify their _Data Types_. That is the kind of data stored in a variabole, whether an integer, real number, or something else
* this is known as _**Declaring Variables**_

Java provides simple data types for representing integers, real numbers, characters, and bolean types.

These types are known as the **Primitive data types** or **Fundamental Types**

Real Numbers
* also numbers with a decimal point

are represented using a method known as _Floating-point_ in computers
