- Computers can do many different jobs because they are programmable

Every profession has tools that make the job easier to do.
 
Carpenters use 
	- hammers
	- saws
	- measuring tapes

Mechanics use 
	- wrenches
	- screwdrivers
	- ratchets

Electronics technicians use 
	- probes 
	- scopes 
	- meters. 

Some tools are unique and can be categorized as belonging to a single profession. 
	For example, 
		- surgeons have certain tools that are designed specifically for surgical operations. 
			- Those tools probably aren’t used by anyone other than surgeons. There are some tools,
			  however, that are used in several professions. 

Screwdrivers, for instance, are used by mechanics, carpenters, and many others.

Computer
	- a machine specifically designed to follow instructions
	- a tool used by so many professions that it cannot be easily categorized. 
		- It can perform so many different jobs that it is perhaps the most versatile tool ever made. 
			- Accountant:
				- computers balance books
				- analyze profits and losses
				- prepare tax reports.

			- Factory Worker:
				- computers control manufacturing machines
				- track production
			- Mechanic
				- computers analyze the various systems in an automobile
				- pinpoint hard-to-find problems

The computer can do such a wide variety of tasks because it can be programmed. It is a machine specifically designed to follow instructions. Because of the computer’s programmability, it doesn’t belong to any single profession. Computers are designed to do whatever job their programs, or Software: computer programs, tell them to do.

Computer programmers do a very important job. They create software that transforms computers into the specialized tools of many trades. Without programmers, the users of computers would have no software, and without software, computers would not be able to do anything.

Computer programming is both an art and a science. 
It is an art because every aspect of a program should be carefully designed. Here are a few of the things that must be designed for any real-world computer program:

	- The logical flow of the instructions
	- The mathematical procedures
	- The layout of the programming statements
	- The appearance of the screens
	- The way information is presented to the user
	- The program’s “user friendliness”
	- Manuals, help systems, and/or other forms of written documentation

There is also a science to programming. 
	- Because programs rarely work right the first time they are written, a lot of analyzing, experimenting, 
	  correcting, and redesigning is required. 

	- This demands patience and persistence of the programmer. 
		- Writing software demands discipline as well. 
		- Programmers must learn special languages such as Java because computers do not understand English 
		  or other human languages. 
		- Programming languages have strict rules that must be carefully followed.

Both the artistic and scientific nature of programming makes writing computer software like designing a car: Both cars and programs should be functional, efficient, powerful, easy to use, and pleasing to look at.
